KEP-4112: Pass down resources to CRI (#4113)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4112-passdown-resources-to-cri/README.md

The proposal is that kubelet discloses full resources information from the
PodSpec to the container runtime. This is accomplished by extending the
ContainerConfig, UpdateContainerResourcesRequest and PodSandboxConfig messages
of the CRI API.

With this information, the runtime can for example do detailed resource
allocation so that CPU, memory and other resources for each container are
optimally aligned.

The resource information is included in PodSandboxConfig so that the runtime
can see the full picture of Pod's resource usage at Pod creation time, for
example enabling more holistic resource allocation and thus better
interoperability between containers inside the Pod.

### CRI API

#### ContainerConfig

The ContainerConfig message (used in CreateContainer request) is extended to
contain unmodified resource requests from the PodSpec.

```diff
+import "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/resource/generated.proto";

 message ContainerConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
 
     // CDI devices for the container.
     repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 17;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 18;

Author: ping @elezar

Check the updated example in *kubelet* section if it makes the proposal clearer. All the mounts, devices and CDI devices of all containers are included. Or was it about smth else?

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 18;

Author: The `ContainerConfig` message already contains all mounts, devices and CDI devices. (see [message ContainerConfig](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/5eda686b5b1446f079d074e83f7cf57963fcdb01/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L1051)). I just didn't copy the whole message here to keep the diff snippet shorter.

Maybe I can highlight that detail in a note. WDYT?

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 18;

Reviewer: Yes, please call it out for clarity and then consider this resolved.

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 18;

Author: Added a note that mounts, devices, CDI devices are part of the ContainerConfig message. Closing this comment as resolved.

 }
 

> +// KubernetesResources contains the resource requests and limits as specified

Author: Do you mean including all needed information (mounts, devices, CDI devices) in this single message? Or renaming the `KubernetesResources` here to `RequestedResources`. I think the issue with the former is that mounts, devices and CDI devices are already separate fields in the existing `ContainerConfig` and we can't remove them (and probably not duplicate the same information in a `KubernetesResources` message)

> +// KubernetesResources contains the resource requests and limits as specified

Author: ping @elezar I was a bit unsure what you meant. The example yamls under **kubelet** section hopefully now better explains how all informatino is passed down in practice.

> +// KubernetesResources contains the resource requests and limits as specified

Reviewer: I was seeing if there was a way to consolidate things so as to not have to make multiple modifications if new resource types / fields are added. Since -- as you point out -- some of the fields of interest are already present in `ContainerConfig`, let's stick with what you have here.

+// in the Kubernetes core API ResourceRequirements.
+message KubernetesResources {
+    // Requests and limits from the Kubernetes container config.
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> requests = 1;
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> limits = 2;
+}
```

#### UpdateContainerResourcesRequest

The UpdateContainerResourcesRequest message is extended to pass down unmodified
resource requests from the PodSpec.

```diff
 message UpdateContainerResourcesRequest {
     // ID of the container to update.
     string container_id = 1;
     // Resource configuration specific to Linux containers.
     LinuxContainerResources linux = 2;
     // Resource configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerResources windows = 3;
     // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary additional information for
     // container resources updating. This can be used for specifying experimental
     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the container.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 5;

Author: @elezar possibly a good question if you think about that from the consistency/coherence point of view. However, the proposal does not currently suggest modifying devices/mounts/CDI devices with the `UpdateContainerResourcesRequest` so that's why they're left out. Thoughts @zvonkok?

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 5;

Author: ping @elezar @zvonkok, any comments, thoughts?

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 5;

Author: Extending the `UpdateContainerResources` request for changing mounts, devices and/or CDI devices is out-of scope of this KEP. However, updating native resources (cpu, mem etc) is already possible with `UpdateContainerResources` so the message was updated to cover the requests/limits for these.

So `UpdateContainerResources` is in scope for providing the requests/limits but not extending it to devs or mounts. Makes sense?

I'll update the description. Keep this comment open until then.

> +    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 5;

Author: This is now described in more detail in the **kubelet** section. Closing the conversation as resolved.

the pod creation time. The container resources here are non-binding and only
informational, e.g. for the runtime to prepare for optimal allocation of
resources of all the containers of the Pod.

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Optional configurations specific to Linux hosts.
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.
+    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 10;
 }
 
+// PodResourceConfig contains information of all resources requirements of
+// the containers of a pod.
+message PodResourceConfig {
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig init_containers = 1;
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 2;
+}
 
+// ContainerResourceConfig contains information of all resource requirements of
+// one container.
+message ContainerResourceConfig {
+    // Name of the container
+    string name= 1;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 2;
+
+    // Mounts for the container.

> +    repeated Mount mounts = 3;

Reviewer 2: Hi, @marquiz  I'm curious about the actual purpose of the newly added Mount here:
(1) what's the goal of adding the `Mount` ?
(2) Is there some new field Mount.Type, which I concern very much, added in it ?
In my case kata-containers/runtime-rs with direct-volume, I need a way to provide a Mount type and pass it to the OCI Spec Mount. I'm not sure if this field `Mount` can provide this ability?

details see：https://github.com/cncf-tags/container-device-interface/issues/162

Author: Hi @Apokleos, this new message (`ContainerResourceConfig`) is purely informational/"read-only". It's purpose is to pass down (to the CRI) information of all resources of all containers of the Pod at sandbox creation time, so that the runtime can prepare/reserve everything early. The `Mount` field also serves this purpose, setting up things correctly at vm/confidential container creation time. It is not meant for making any edits. The containers created later are expected to match with the information in this message.

Extending the CRI API to communicate all resources already at sandbox creation
and pass down resource requests and limits (of native and extended resources)
would provide a comprehensive and early-enough view of the resource usage of
all containers of the pod, allowing improved resource allocation without
breaking any existing use cases.

### Goals

- make the information about all required resources (e.g. native and extended
  resources, devices, mounts, CDI devices) of a Pod available to the CRI at
  sandbox creation time
- make container resource spec transparently visible to CRI (the container
  runtime)

### Non-Goals

- change kubelet resource management
- change existing behavior of CRI

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a VM-based container runtime developer, I want to allocate/expose enough
RAM, hugepages, hot- or cold-pluggable PCI(e) ports, protected memory sections
and other resources for the VM to ensure that all containers in the pod are
guaranteed to get the resources they require.

#### Story 2

As a platform-optimized CRI runtime developer, I want to know detailed
container resource requests to be able to make optimal, platform specific,

> resource allocations. Some of the resources may be handled outside cgroups and

Reviewer 3: Could you provide a quick example on such platform-specific resource allocation?

Author: I updated this section to:

*As a developer of non-runc / non-Linux CRI runtime, I want to know detailed container resource requests to be able to make correct resource allocation for the applications. I cannot rely on cgroup parameters on this but need to know what the user requested to fairly allocate resources between applications.*

WDYT @yujuhong ?

#### Story 3

As a cluster administrator, I want to install an NRI plugin that does
customized resource handling. I run kubelet with CPU manager and memory manager
disabled. Instead I use my NRI plugin to do customized resource allocation
(e.g. cpu and memory pinning). To do that properly I need the actual resource
requests and limits requested by the user.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The proposal only adds new informantional data to the CRI API between kubelet
and the container runtime with no user-visible changes which mitigates possible
risks considerably.

> Data duplication/inconsistency with native resources could be considered a risk

Author: @yujuhong  I'd say that really depends on the runtime/backend. Think about non-runc/non-Linux runtimes that do not have the concept of cgropups like WASM or other operating systems. Then, I think also Windows might benefit from knowing what the users' actually requested. Also, I think the detailed cpu cgroup parameters are tightly coupled with the CFS scheduler and as such not very future proof.

> Data duplication/inconsistency with native resources could be considered a risk

Reviewer 3: It's a good discussion to have, but we're essentially talking about re-defining the resource API in CRI. If we want to go with that direction, we need to expand the scope and be more clear about the expectations of the runtime. Having all levels of information present in the CRI without further cleanup/definitions seems confusing though.

> Data duplication/inconsistency with native resources could be considered a risk

Reviewer 4: this comment doesn't seem to be addressed?

> Data duplication/inconsistency with native resources could be considered a risk

Author: Taking a step back from the exotic non-runc and non-Linux/Windows usage scenarios. Yes: the expectation is that the CRI runtime respects the parameters in the LinuxContainerResources/WindowsContainerResources.

## Design Details

The proposal is that kubelet discloses full resources information from the
PodSpec to the container runtime. This is accomplished by extending the
ContainerConfig, UpdateContainerResourcesRequest and PodSandboxConfig messages
of the CRI API.

With this information, the runtime can for example do detailed resource
allocation so that CPU, memory and other resources for each container are
optimally aligned.

The resource information is included in PodSandboxConfig so that the runtime
can see the full picture of Pod's resource usage at Pod creation time, for
example enabling more holistic resource allocation and thus better
interoperability between containers inside the Pod.

### CRI API

#### ContainerConfig

The ContainerConfig message (used in CreateContainer request) is extended to
contain unmodified resource requests from the PodSpec.

```diff
+import "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/resource/generated.proto";

 message ContainerConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
 
     // CDI devices for the container.
     repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 17;
+

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Reviewer 3: Hmm..but isn't the main use case to inform the runtime at podsandbox creation time what/how much resources to allocate? Having it in the podsandbox meets the purpose already. What'd the runtime do when getting this additional info?

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Author: @yujuhong as said, it's for consistency/symmetry. Somewhat similar to PodSandboxConfig being passed on each CreateContainerRequest "just for easy reference". The may use that information for resource optimization when the container is created. But now, writing this I realize that the container resources are already in PodSandboxConfig so it could take it from there, if needed.

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Reviewer 5: everything we add is a contract we need to maintain, making it for consistency/symmetry reasons seems very expensive

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Reviewer 5: >  But now, writing this I realize that the container resources are already in PodSandboxConfig so it could take it from there, if needed.

this comment is still not resolved, do we need only `PodSandboxConfig` or do we need `ContainerConfig` too ... the symmetry argument does not seem to hold much weight though

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Reviewer 5: @kad to clarify, I'm not evaluating if technically is needed or not, or pushing back, is just that the way it is phrased it is not clear, doing something because of API for symmetry is a bit vague, don't you think?

Having at least some sentences explaining what you say, to understand the motivation why we are doing it, I think is important, at the end of the day, KEPs serve as the documentation of features and if we omit these details after a few years none of us will remember why we did this

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Reviewer 6: @aojea make sense.
@marquiz  can you please move bits of the comments to KEP text to clarify usage and reasoning for those fields?

> +    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container

Reviewer 5: , appreciate it, +1 on my side, specially with the angle of the new work on pod mutability .
thanks

+}
```

#### UpdateContainerResourcesRequest

The UpdateContainerResourcesRequest message is extended to pass down unmodified
resource requests from the PodSpec.

```diff
 message UpdateContainerResourcesRequest {
     // ID of the container to update.
     string container_id = 1;
     // Resource configuration specific to Linux containers.
     LinuxContainerResources linux = 2;
     // Resource configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerResources windows = 3;
     // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary additional information for
     // container resources updating. This can be used for specifying experimental
     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the container.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 5;
 }
```

#### PodSandboxConfig

The PodSandboxConfig message (part of the RunPodSandbox request) will be
extended to contain information about resources of all its containers known at
the pod creation time. The container resources here are non-binding and only

> informational, e.g. for the runtime to prepare for optimal allocation of

Author: Hmm, yes, this is misleading description. I think what I tried to say is that the runtime is not required to act on this information, it can function just as it did before this change. However, it's a peek to the future and the runtime can use this information, if needed, to prepare everything so that containers can be created/started. I change the text to: 

*The container runtime may use this information to make preparations for all upcoming containers of the pod. E.g. setup all needed resources for a VM-based pod or  prepare for optimal allocation of resources of all the containers of the Pod. However, the container runtime may continue to operate as they did (before this enhancement). That is, it can safely ignore the per-container resource information and allocate resources for each container separately, one at a time, with the `CreateContainer`*

@yujuhong  WDYT?

> informational, e.g. for the runtime to prepare for optimal allocation of

Reviewer 3: If we only pass down the aggregated pod-level view, we can state clearly in the API itself what this is for. That meets the immediate need, and we can discuss how to evolve CRI to cater to more diverse environment as a long term goal. What do you think about that direction?

```yaml
RunPodSandboxRequest:
  config:
  ...
    podResources:
      containers:
      - name: cnt-1
        kubernetes_resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 1G
            example.com/resource: "1"
          limits:
            cpu: "2"
            memory: 2G
            example.com/resource: "1"
        CDI_devices:
        - name: example.com/resource=CDI-Dev-1
        mounts:
        - container_path: /my-volume
          host_path: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/<pod-uid>/volumes/kubernetes.io~empty-dir/my-volume
        - container_path: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount
          host_path: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/<pod-uid>/volumes/kubernetes.io~projected/kube-api-access-4srqm
          readonly: true
        - container_path: /dev/termination-log
          host_path: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/<pod-uid>/containers/cnt-1/<uuid>
```

Note that all device plugin resources are passed down in the
`kubernetes_resources` field but this does not contain any properties of the
device that was actually allocated for the container. However, these properties
are exposed through the `CDI_devices`, `mounts` and `devices` fields.

> ### Test Plan

Author: That was missing, yes. But now added. PTAL @yujuhong

## Motivation

When the pod sandbox is created, the kubelet does not provide the CRI runtime
any information about the resources (such as native resources, host devices,
mounts, CDI devices etc) that will be required by the application. The CRI
runtime only becomes aware of the resources piece by piece when containers of
the pod are created (one-by-one).

This can cause issues with VM-based runtimes
(e.g. [Kata containers](https://katacontainers.io/) and [Confidential Containers](https://www.cncf.io/projects/confidential-containers/)) that need to prepare the VM before containers are created.

For Kata to handle PCIe devices properly the CRI needs to tell the kata-runtime
how many PCIe root-ports or PCIe switch-ports the hypervisor needs to create at
sandbox creation depending on the number of devices allocated by the containers.
The PCIe root-port is a static configuration and the hypervisor cannot adjust it
once the sandbox is created. During container creation the PCIe devices are
hot-plugged to the PCIe root-port or switch-port. If the number of pre-allocated
pluggable ports is too low, the attachment will fail (container devices >
pre-allocated hot-pluggable ports).

> In the case of Confidential Containers (uses Kata unter the hood with additional

Author: Thx, fixed in the latest update

operate as they did (before this enhancement). That is, it can safely ignore
the per-container resource information and allocate resources for each
container separately, one at a time, with the `CreateContainer`.

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Optional configurations specific to Linux hosts.
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.
+    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 10;
 }
 
+// PodResourceConfig contains information of all resources requirements of
+// the containers of a pod.
+message PodResourceConfig {
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig init_containers = 1;
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 2;
+}
 
+// ContainerResourceConfig contains information of all resource requirements of
+// one container.
+message ContainerResourceConfig {
+    // Name of the container
+    string name= 1;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 2;
+
+    // Mounts for the container.

> +    repeated Mount mounts = 3;

Reviewer 6: for confidential VMs (e.g. TDX) it is needed to know all the host resources (mounts, devices specifically) that are needed to be passed through into VM before VM is created. Afterwards there is no chance to "hotplug" them. Right now creation of VM is delayed until first CreateContainer message arrives, and this creates issue if you have multiple containers in the pod.

> +    repeated Mount mounts = 3;

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/cri-api/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L224-L227

>    If the hostPath doesn't exist, then runtimes should report error.

What is the expected behavior on the pod sandbox if the path doesn't exist? I could imagine a case where a subpath is initialized by an init container.

> +    repeated Mount mounts = 3;

Author: Thanks @tallclair, good question. I think you are referring to hostPath volumes here.

I did some investigation and it looks like the CRI runtime implementations don't match the the expected behavior as stated in the CRI API (container creation should fail if the past does not exist). However in practice the CRI runtime creates the missing path (a new directory) and mounts that into the container (I don't know if there are runtime config options to affect this behavior, though). In any case, this proposal wouldn't change anything, there would be no impact on existing users.

However, for VM-based cases where mounts cannot be attached after VM-creation, the scenario you presented cannot be supported.

Some more details:

For hostPath volumes that have a `type` defined the scenario you presented is not possible – all hostPaths must exist before the sandbox is run (and before the first init container starts). The kubelet's volume manager does setup/validation for all volumes before the sandbox creation. Pod creation is pending until the checks pass. For example with `type: File`, the pod creation "get's stuck" if the file does not exist. Or, with `type: FileOrCreate` kubelet will create the file (before RunPodSandbox kicks in) if it does not exist.

However, for hostPath volumes with an empty `type` the situation is more interesting. The volume's setup/validation phase does not do any checks on the existence/type of the file. Later, kubelet just blindly hands over the mount spec to the runtime at container creation time. If some init/sidecar container happened to create the path (before the container consuming it is started) then it's mounted. If nothing creates the path before the container (consuming it) is started, then the runtime effectively does mkdir -p and mounts it. This scenario cannot be supported if mounts cannot be attached after VM-creation – the runtime would fail sandbox creation.

containers) early.

Kubelet will be be extended to pass down all mounts, devices, CDI devices and
the unmodified resource requests and limits to the container runtime in all
related CRI requests, i.e.  RunPodSandbox, CreateContainer and
UpdateContainerResources.

For example, take a PodSpec:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
...
spec:
  containers:
  - name: cnt-1
    image: k8s.gcr.io/pause
    resources:
      requests:
        cpu: 1
        memory: 1G
        example.com/resource: 1
      limits:
        cpu: 2
        memory: 2G
        example.com/resource: 1
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /my-volume
      name: my-volume
  volumes:
  - name: my-volume
    emptyDir:
```

Then kubelet will send the following RunPodSandboxRequest when creating the Pod
(represented here in yaml format):

```yaml
RunPodSandboxRequest:
  config:
  ...
    podResources:
      containers:
      - name: cnt-1
        kubernetes_resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 1G
            example.com/resource: "1"
          limits:
            cpu: "2"
            memory: 2G
            example.com/resource: "1"

>         CDI_devices:

Reviewer: Question: Should this be `cdi_devices` or `cdiDevices` instead? I'm not sure if there is a preference in terms of the definitions.

Author: This is just a yaml representation of the protobuf message. In the .proto the field is `cdi_devices`, in the corresponding go struct it's `CDIDevices` but is json/yaml marshalled as `CDI_devices` (I think), looking at this:
https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/5eda686b5b1446f079d074e83f7cf57963fcdb01/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.pb.go#L4846

Author: ...so I think `CDI_devices` is consistent, WDYT?

Reviewer: I think we've been inconsistent with how we're naming it though. See:
* https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2c5105e7b80f97ab2da0d47a6db6875aec38331c/staging/src/k8s.io/cri-api/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L1108
* https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2c5105e7b80f97ab2da0d47a6db6875aec38331c/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/podresources/v1/api.proto#L93
* https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2c5105e7b80f97ab2da0d47a6db6875aec38331c/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/dra/v1alpha3/api.proto#L67
* https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2c5105e7b80f97ab2da0d47a6db6875aec38331c/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/deviceplugin/v1beta1/api.proto#L198

Seems like 3 out of 4 are using `CDIDevices` (with `CDI_Devices` in the proto message).

Reviewer: For the record, I don't feel too strongly about this and I'm happy with matching what is already in the CRI **or** `CDIDevices`.

Author: This is just an example "output". Maybe the naming details can be sorted out in the implementation/code review?

Author: @elezar? Is it ok to close as resolved and not get stuck into this naming detail here?

        - name: example.com/resource=CDI-Dev-1
        mounts:
        - container_path: /my-volume
          host_path: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/<pod-uid>/volumes/kubernetes.io~empty-dir/my-volume
        - container_path: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount
          host_path: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/<pod-uid>/volumes/kubernetes.io~projected/kube-api-access-4srqm
          readonly: true
        - container_path: /dev/termination-log
          host_path: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/<pod-uid>/containers/cnt-1/<uuid>
```

Note that all device plugin resources are passed down in the
`kubernetes_resources` field but this does not contain any properties of the
device that was actually allocated for the container. However, these properties

> are exposed through the `CDI_devices`, `mounts` and `devices` fields.

Reviewer: To clarify: Assuming a podspec includes `example.com/resource: 1` for a container, is the intent that the modifications to the `ContainerConfig` from the `ContainerAllocateResponse` are included when creating the POD sandbox in this case? Are the other fields that can be modified relevant at all (container annotations and environement variables)?

Author: The assumption is all modificactions to devices, CDI devices and mounts are included. The current understanding is that annotations and env are not relevant at this phase so they are not included. The can be added, of course, if there is a clear use case for that.

Author: @elezar?

Reviewer: I think I am comfortable with stating that the environment variables are not relevant here, but in the case of the device plugins with CDI, we do allow for setting container annotations with the prefix `cdi.k8s.io/` to specify which devices are to be injected by the runtime. This has been superseded by the addition of the `CDIDevices` field in the case of CDI and we could state that this is the only supported mechanism in this case.

Given that annotations are sometimes (mis)used to develop POC and early access to features before full CRI support, does adding annotations explicitly here make sense?

Author: > Given that annotations are sometimes (mis)used to develop POC and early access to features before full CRI support, does adding annotations explicitly here make sense?

Hmm, I'm not sure, might be. I think annotations could be added for sure, if people think they would be needed. I'll mark this as <UNRESOLVED> in the PR for now (in the next update).

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 8: As a Kata Containers and Confidential Containers maintainer, having the aggregated pod-level resources is helpful, but doesn't solve the issue for us, as it can misrepresent the amount of memory could be consumed by a container running in a VM based sandbox, specifically in the case of burstable pods (looking specifically here when limits are not set).
 
Note that solving this issue, though, is quite hard on the VM case where no hotplug of memory is allowed (in the case of Confidential VMs that are using Intel TDX / AMD SEV - SNP, for instance).  However, with the information per-pod we'd be able to, on our side, either decide what's best to do in the burstable scenario, or at least give a proper and educated error to the user.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 7: > Note that solving this issue, though, is quite hard on the VM case where no hotplug of memory is allowed (in the case of Confidential VMs that are using Intel TDX / AMD SEV - SNP, for instance). However, with the information per-pod we'd be able to, on our side, either decide what's best to do in the burstable scenario, or at least give a proper and educated error to the user.

This sounds like something that would be better addressed at the k8s API policy layer then? For example, a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy that requires pods to have a QOSClass of `Guaranteed` when `RuntimeClassName==Kata`?

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 6: they can be Burstable, but not resizable.  Hardcoding to Guaranteed is not really a solution in my opinion.

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Container annotations

Container annotations could be used as an alternative way to pass down the

> resource requests and limits to the container runtime.

Reviewer 7: What are container annotations? Or does this mean per-container pod annotations? If this is currently only needed for Kata Containers, using an admission webhook to inject the resource info as a pod annotation seems like a decent starting point to prove this out.

Reviewer 6: in CRI CreateContainer there are container level annotations that are visible only to kubelet and runtime. those are not user visible or can be affected by user. Those are used as I recall only by device plugins, as part of allocation response.

the applications. I cannot rely on cgroup parameters on this but need to know
what the user requested to fairly allocate resources between applications.

#### Story 3

As a cluster administrator, I want to install an NRI plugin that does
customized resource handling. I run kubelet with CPU manager and memory manager
disabled. Instead I use my NRI plugin to do customized resource allocation
(e.g. cpu and memory pinning). To do that properly I need the actual resource
requests and limits requested by the user.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> The proposal only adds new informantional data to the CRI API between kubelet

Reviewer 9: nit: s/informantional/informational/

Author: Thx, fixed

is:

- adding mounts, devices, CDI devices and the unmodified resource requests and
  limits of all containers into RunPodSandbox request
- adding unmodified resource requests and limits into CreateContainer and
  UpdateContainerResources requests

For example, take a PodSpec:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
...
spec:
  containers:
  - name: cnt-1
    image: k8s.gcr.io/pause
    resources:
      requests:
        cpu: 1
        memory: 1G
        example.com/resource: 1
      limits:
        cpu: 2
        memory: 2G
        example.com/resource: 1
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /my-volume
      name: my-volume
  volumes:
  - name: my-volume
    emptyDir:
```

Then kubelet will send the following RunPodSandboxRequest when creating the Pod
(represented here in yaml format):

```yaml
RunPodSandboxRequest:
  config:
  ...
    podResources:
      containers:
      - name: cnt-1
        kubernetes_resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 1G
            example.com/resource: "1"
          limits:
            cpu: "2"
            memory: 2G
            example.com/resource: "1"
        CDI_devices:
        - name: example.com/resource=CDI-Dev-1

>         mounts:

Reviewer 10: missing the new oci image reference volume type..

Author: Thanks, noted. I added an example image volume. PTAL @mikebrow

Reviewer 10: pls also add image ref.. (the result of pulling the image during pod ensure images )

implementations will continue to work as previously, even if the feature is
enabled.

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

The feature is node-local (kubelet-only) so there is no dependencies or effects
to other Kubernetes components.

The behavior is unchanged if either kubelet or the CRI runtime running on a
node does not support the feature. If kubelet has the feature enabled but the
CRI runtime does not support it, the CRI runtime will ignore the new fields in
the CRI API and function as previously. Similarly, if the CRI runtime supports
the feature but the kubelet does not, the runtime will resort to the previous

> behavior.

Reviewer 10: Even if the kubelet and container runtime support the feature.. and in some cases even if the NRI plugins are installed...  long running pods created N-1 or N-2 etc. will be a problem for the NRI plugins that expect to see the additional updating pod event and/or additional pod metadata.  A restart of the plugin will be synching some pods that have the new metadata and some that do not.

Reviewer 10: Gut tells me at some point we're going to need a version tag for the contents of the pod metadata. Sure we can continue down the non-breaking add changes only path.  But I'm reminded of certain alpha's that did not make it and/or redrafted completely (DRA).  Thus begging the question.

Author: If the kubelet and the runtime support this, then a long running pod (that gets restarted) should get this information from the kubelet. I'm a bit thin on the exact details here but updating the kubelet and the runtime without draining the node may have this issue.

@mikebrow, thoughts, do you have suggestions to address this?

Reviewer 10: Yes draining the node.. Stopping and restarting the pods is probably the only reasonable way to guarantee the new metadata is attached to a running pod when the NRI plugin syncs with the container runtime.

Was just pointing out the need to mention that for this feature. Turn the feature off.. no metadata, turn it back on.. only new pods will have it. yada yada

Author: K. I now added a note to the **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior** section under PRR questionnaire:

```
Long running pods that persist (without restart) over kubelet and CRI runtime
update which enables the feature may experience version skew of the metadata.
After enabling the feature, the CRI runtime does not have the aggregated
information of all resources of the pod, provided with this feature, as the
kubelet didn't restart these pods (didn't send the CreatePodSandbox CRI
request). This may affect some scenarios e.g. NRI plugins. This "metadata skew"
can be avoided by draining the node before updating the kubelet and the CRI
runtime.
```

WDYT @mikebrow ?

Reviewer 10: works..

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [X] Feature gate
  - Feature gate name: KubeletContainerResourcesInPodSandbox
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - kubelet

> ###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

Reviewer 9: please answer all the alpha questions, thanks

Author: PRR updated

The PCIe root-port is a static configuration and the hypervisor cannot adjust it
once the sandbox is created. During container creation the PCIe devices are
hot-plugged to the PCIe root-port or switch-port. If the number of pre-allocated
pluggable ports is too low, the attachment will fail (container devices >
pre-allocated hot-pluggable ports).

In the case of Confidential Containers (uses Kata under the hood with additional
software components for attestation) the CRI needs to consider the cold-plug aka
direct attachment use-case. At sandbox creation time the hypervisor needs to
know the exact number of pass-through devices and its properties
(VFIO IOMMU group, the actual VFIO device - there can be several devices in a
IOMMU group, attach to PCIe root-port or PCIe switch-port (PCI-Bridge)).
In a confidential setting a user does not want to reconfigure the VM
(creates an attack-vector) on every create container request. The hypervisor
needs a fully static view of resources needed for VM sizing.

Independent of hot or cold-plug the hypervisor needs to know how the PCI(e)
topology needs to look like at sandbox creation time.

> Updating resources of a container means also resizing the VM, hence the

Reviewer 5: I think resources are immutable once set

>  # * spec: Forbidden: pod updates may not change fields other than `spec.containers[*].image`,`spec.initContainers[*].image`,`spec.activeDeadlineSeconds`,`spec.tolerations` (only additions to existing tolerations),`spec.terminationGracePeriodSeconds` (allow it to be set to 1 if it was previously negative)

what resources will trigger a VM resizing?

Reviewer 3: Setting resources are not allowed for ephemeral containers, so pod-resizing is the only use case for now (unless we want to consider the container mutation proposal). https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/ephemeral-containers/#what-is-an-ephemeral-container

BTW, pod level resource spec seems like a good fit for hypervisor use cases.

Author: > pod level resource spec seems like a good fit for hypervisor use cases.

We don't want to modify the pod spec. Just get visibility on the CRI level. And not just resources (as `ResourceRequirements`) but also other "resources" (in a wider meaning).

Reviewer 11: With the introduction  of the pod level resources in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/2837-pod-level-resource-spec/README.md are some of the issues mitigated with a recommendation for VM based pods to prefer specifying pod level resources?

example enabling more holistic resource allocation and thus better
interoperability between containers inside the Pod.

### CRI API

#### PodSandboxConfig

The PodSandboxConfig message (part of the RunPodSandbox request) will be
extended to contain information about resources of all its containers known at
the pod creation time. The container runtime may use this information to make
preparations for all upcoming containers of the pod. E.g. setup all needed
resources for a VM-based pod or prepare for optimal allocation of resources of
all the containers of the Pod. However, the container runtime may continue to
operate as they did (before this enhancement). That is, it can ignore
the resource information presented here and allocate resources for each
container separately at container creation time with the `CreateContainer`
request.

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Optional configurations specific to Linux hosts.
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.

> +    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 10;

Reviewer 12: are we certain these fields are platform agnostic?

Author: We have not identified anything platform-specific. If such need would emerge in the future, I think we should/could add `Linux` and `Windows` fields in the `ContainerResourceConfig` (and corresponding `LinuxContainerResourceConfig` and `WindowsContainerResourceConfig` messages). Following the pattern in `PodSandboxConfig`, `ContainerConfig` et al. WDYT @haircommander @mrunalp @mikebrow ?

Reviewer 10: sgtm..

 }
 
+// PodResourceConfig contains information of all resources requirements of
+// the containers of a pod.
+message PodResourceConfig {

> +    repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 1;

Reviewer 12: with the introduction of pod level resource limits you'll also need a KubernetesResources field here. I think syncing the implementations to handle this will make it easiest to move both through the process (cc @ndixita )

Author: Very good point. I need to sleep over and come back to this tomorrow. I'll update the KEP accordingly.

Author: The proposal is now updated to have contain the pod-level resources. As a separate/"conditional" snippet with a reference to the KEP and the PR

 
     // CDI devices for the container.
     repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 17;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 18;
 }
 
+// KubernetesResources contains the resource requests and limits as specified
+// in the Kubernetes core API ResourceRequirements.
+message KubernetesResources {
+    // Requests and limits from the Kubernetes container config.
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> requests = 1;
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> limits = 2;
+}
```

Note that mounts, devices, CDI devices are part of the ContainerConfig message
but are left out of the diff snippet above.

The resources (mounts, devices, CDI devices, Kubernetes resources) in the
CreateContainer request should be identical to what was (pre-)informed in the
RunPodSandbox request. If they are different, the CRI runtime may fail the
container creation, for example because changes cannot be applied after a
VM-based Pod has been created.

#### UpdateContainerResourcesRequest

The UpdateContainerResourcesRequest message is extended to pass down unmodified
resource requests from the PodSpec.

> 

Reviewer 12: currently in VPA KEP there's a proposal to add UpdatePodSandboxResourcesRequest https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4704/files#diff-14542847beb0f0fd767db1aff1316f8569a968385e2bb89567c4cc0af1ae5942R348 which should have the pod level KubernetesResources, IMO cc @tallclair

Author: Again, very good point. As with https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4113#discussion_r1783367961 I'll update the KEP tomorrow.

Author: @haircommander now the proposal is updated with a reference to the in-place-pod-updates-beta (a new section on UpdatePodSandboxResourcesRequest)

extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime`: `2024-02-02` - `68.3%`

The
[fake_runtime](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/testing/fake_runtime_service.go)
will be used in unit tests to verify that the Kubelet correctly passes down the
resource information to the CRI runtime.

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

For alpha, no new integration tests are planned.

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

> For alpha, no new e2e tests are planned.

Reviewer 12: eventually having a suite of NRI tests that we make a plugin and deploy with the different runtimes to show the runtime is also passing those to the plugins could be cool. I wouldn't personally block this feature on it though

Author: I like the idea, as a way to test this. Captured it in the KEP, so it doesn't get forgotten.

something else. The KEP should keep this high-level with a focus on what
signals will be looked at to determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag

> - Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

Reviewer 12: lol bc it's in the comment, hard to tell while reviewing! sorry

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests

> - Allowing time for feedback

Reviewer 12: this all looks like boilerplate, can you update it?

Reviewer 12: lol bc it's in the comment, hard to tell while reviewing! sorry

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial unit tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Feature gate enabled by default
- containerd and CRI-O runtimes have released versions that have adopted the
  new CRI API changes

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Author: Thanks, noted. I didn't change this (yet). WDYT @mikebrow?

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Reviewer 10: I think the NRI cases are nec., or some suitable replacement via the status apis, to properly implement the e2e buckets, and story 3. To early to say but may need two alpha's if insufficient time.  That or scale back the content/use cases?

Additionally, I believe we need to add NRI details in this KEP or the followup KEP for the second alpha.

For example, NRI needs a new updating pod lifecycle event and the additional metadata content https://github.com/containerd/nri?tab=readme-ov-file#pod-data-and-available-lifecycle-events

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Author: @haircommander thoughts? I think we could start prototyping the NRI API alongside, right away. With two alphas you mean two release cycles in alpha or two different iterations (with breaking changes)?

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Reviewer 12: my point is we can decouple this from NRI. NRI can catchup with this at it's own timeline, we don't need to have it here to prove it works (CRI proxy could also do so, or unit tests really would suffice).

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Author: Fair enough. I now dropped this (*The NRI API has adopted the feature*) from the beta criteria. We can then add this back and argue about it when pushing for beta :)

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Reviewer 10: nod can modify story 3 or modify it for proxy enablement as an option.. leave the NRI discussion for the NRI project.

> - The [NRI API](https://github.com/containerd/nri) has adopted the feature

Author: @haircommander can this be closed as resolved?

#### GA

- No bugs reported in the previous cycle
- N examples of real-world usage

> - N installs

Reviewer 12: maybe drop this until we have clear criteria?

Author: Updated. Dropped the "N...". Kept the "No bugs" part

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

> - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer 12: FYI these fields need to be filled out to be targeted at alpha

Author: Woops, thanks, updated. I think was left unspecified as I didn't come up with any good name. Now set this to `KubeletContainerResourcesInPodSandbox` to have something to argue on.

burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [X] Feature gate
  - Feature gate name: KubeletContainerResourcesInPodSandbox
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - kubelet

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

> The default behavior in Kubernetes is unchanged.

Reviewer 9: Well, not exactly. It changes the behavior of the kubelet for every pod on that node, in that it now passes the information to the runtime. Then your next paragraph makes more sense if it says "This may cause change in behavior...".

Author: Thanks, I see this was contradictory :face_with_diagonal_mouth: What I tried to express is that enabling this in Kubernetes alone wouldn't change any default behavior...

I removed the first paragraph entirely. This section now states:

```
There might be changes in behavior if the underlying CRI runtime depends...
```

PTAL @johnbelamaric

Author: Closing as resolved

-->

Unit tests for the feature gate will be added.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

Rollback or rollout in the kubelet should not fail - it only enables/disabled
the information (fields in the CRI message) passed down to the CRI runtime.

However, if the CRI runtime depends on the feature, a rollout or rollback may
cause failures of applications on pod restarts. Running pods are not affected.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> Alpha: No new metrics are planned. Non-ready pods with CreatePodSandboxError

Reviewer 9: Are there any metrics around the GRPC calls from kubelet to CRI that could show errors?

Author: Good point. The exising `kubelet_started_pods_errors_total` metric == CreatePodSandboxErrors. I modified this section to

```
Alpha: No new metrics are planned. Increase in the existing
`kubelet_started_pods_errors_total` metric can indicate a problem caused by
this feature.

Generally, non-ready pods with CreatePodSandboxError status (reflected by the
`kubelet_started_pods_errors_total` metric) is a possible indicator. The error
message will contain details if the CRI failure is related to the feature.
```

@johnbelamaric PTAL

Author: Closing as resolved

status is one indicator. The error message will contain details if the CRI
failure is related to the feature.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

Alpha: Manual testing of the feature gate is performed.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> By examing the kubelet configuration (feature gate) and the version of the

Reviewer 9: @logicalhan added metrics for all feature gates, at least in API server. Han, is that in all components (kubelet in particular)?

@marquiz, if all that matters is whether the feature gate is on or off (which I think is true, it's why it's a default behavior change for that kubelet), then this metric is sufficient to determine if it is in use.

Author: Thanks for pointing this out. I modified this section,  proposing the `kubernetes_feature_enabled` metric to be used for checking kubelet enablement. PTAL @johnbelamaric

Author: Closing this as resolved

The cluster operator can verify that the feature is working by examining the
kubelet and CRI runtime logs.

The CRI runtime or NRI plugin developers depending on the feature can ensure
that it is working by verifying that all the required information is available
at pod sandbox creation time.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

N/A.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

> N/A.

Reviewer 9: For SLI: CRI call error rate?
For SLO: really really low error rate?

Author: I added proposed SLO and SLI based on the `kubelet_started_pods_errors_total` metric. No explicit numbers given, though, as this is an indirect metric. PTAL @johnbelamaric

Author: @johnbelamaric closing this as resolved.

burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [X] Feature gate
  - Feature gate name: KubeletContainerResourcesInPodSandbox
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - kubelet

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

> There might be changes in behavior if the underlying CRI runtime depends on

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Yes. The kubelet will start passing the extra information to the CRI plugin for every container it creates.
Whether this has any effect depends on if the underlying CRI runtime supports
```

Author: Thanks. Updated as suggested

pod sandbox creation time. This can be problematic for example in the case of
VM-based runtimes where all resources need to be reserved/prepared when the VM
(i.e. sandbox) is being created.

Second, the kubelet does not provide complete information about the container
resources specification of native and extended resources (requests and limits)
to CRI. However, various use cases have been identified where detailed
knowledge of all the resources can be utilized in container runtimes for more
optimal resource allocation to improve application performance and reduce
cross-application interference.

This KEP proposes CRI API extensions for providing complete view of pods
resources at sandbox creation, and, providing unobfuscated information about
the resource requests and limits to container runtimes.

## Motivation

When the pod sandbox is created, the kubelet does not provide the CRI runtime
any information about the resources (such as native resources, host devices,
mounts, CDI devices etc) that will be required by the application. The CRI
runtime only becomes aware of the resources piece by piece when containers of

> the pod are created (one-by-one).

Reviewer 7: Which of this information must come from the Kubelet, and which can be read from the k8s API? Resource requests & limits and volumes can all be read directly from the pod object. Do they need to be plumbed through the CRI, or can you just read from the k8s API instead?

Author: Adding to that, for mounts we want more/different information than what is available on the Kubernetes API level. At least the `host_path` that will be mounted to the container.

Reviewer 13: Additional to the other points, in Kata we cannot handle `subPath` in `volumeMounts` because subPath is handled completely by the kubelet. https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/d7774fce9a7fcec890d7c0beffacd6ae34152b01/pkg/volume/util/subpath/subpath_linux.go#L175

all containers of the pod, allowing improved resource allocation without
breaking any existing use cases.

### Goals

- make the information about all required resources (e.g. native and extended
  resources, devices, mounts, CDI devices) of a Pod available to the CRI at
  sandbox creation time
- make container resource spec transparently visible to CRI (the container
  runtime)

### Non-Goals

- change kubelet resource management
- change existing behavior of CRI

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a VM-based container runtime developer, I want to allocate/expose enough
RAM, hugepages, hot- or cold-pluggable PCI(e) ports, protected memory sections
and other resources for the VM to ensure that all containers in the pod are
guaranteed to get the resources they require.

#### Story 2

As a developer of non-runc / non-Linux CRI runtime, I want to know detailed
container resource requests to be able to make correct resource allocation for
the applications. I cannot rely on cgroup parameters on this but need to know
what the user requested to fairly allocate resources between applications.

#### Story 3

As a cluster administrator, I want to install an NRI plugin that does

> customized resource handling. I run kubelet with CPU manager and memory manager

Reviewer 14: A similar case but something that could be a story of its own stresses the goal for having better visibility to extended resources:

"As a cluster administrator, I want to install an NRI plugin that does limits enforcement for extended resources that kubelet does not know about (e.g., `misc` cgroup settings). These extended resources are consumed either via the pod spec or indirectly via Pod `overhead`".

Author: Thx @mythi added this as a separate user story. WDYT?

+    CONTAINER = 2;
+}
```

#### CreateContainer

The ContainerConfig message (used in CreateContainer request) is extended to
contain unmodified resource requests from the PodSpec.

```diff
+import "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/resource/generated.proto";

 message ContainerConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
 
     // CDI devices for the container.
     repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 17;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 18;
 }
 
+// KubernetesResources contains the resource requests and limits as specified
+// in the Kubernetes core API ResourceRequirements.
+message KubernetesResources {
+    // Requests and limits from the Kubernetes container config.
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> requests = 1;
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> limits = 2;
+}
```

Note that mounts, devices, CDI devices are part of the ContainerConfig message
but are left out of the diff snippet above.

Including the KubernetesResources in the ContainerConfig message serves
multiple purposes:

> 1. Catch changes that happen between pod sandbox creation and container

Reviewer 12: in place resize should be writing a message to the runtime that a pod or container had changed resources, right @tallclair ? I think that'd be better than having a runtime interpret diffs in container values...

Author: Does it do so when the container hasn't yet been created. IIRC the thinking behind this case were the kata/coco use cases. The runtime or nri plugin whatever CAN detect changes if they need/want to.

Reviewer 11: Let's validate this flow. I don't think letting the runtime handle this infer this from diffs is correct.

[OCI hooks](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/master/config.md),
[runC](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc) wrappers,
[NRI](https://github.com/containerd/nri) plugins or in some cases even
applications themselves would benefit on seeing the original resource requests
and limits e.g. for doing customized resource optimization.

Extending the CRI API to communicate all resources already at sandbox creation
and pass down resource requests and limits (of native and extended resources)
would provide a comprehensive and early-enough view of the resource usage of
all containers of the pod, allowing improved resource allocation without
breaking any existing use cases.

### Goals

- make the information about all required resources (e.g. native and extended
  resources, devices, mounts, CDI devices) of a Pod available to the CRI at
  sandbox creation time
- make container resource spec transparently visible to CRI (the container
  runtime)

### Non-Goals

- change kubelet resource management
- change existing behavior of CRI
- add UpdatePodSandboxResources CRI rpc (this is covered by [KEP-1287][kep-1287], [PR][kep-1287-beta-pr])

> - add pod-level resource requirements (this is covered by [KEP-2837][kep-2837], [PR][kep-2837-alpha-pr])

Reviewer 4: Can you please clarify what does those two statements mean? Do you mean that those KEPs will need to contribute to this API?

The `1287` is targeting beta, while this one is targeting alpha. So this KEP will need to clarify how it will work with InPlace updates

cc: @tallclair @ndixita

Author: I could also remove these from non-goals. I added these here because we talk about UpdatePodSandboxResources message and the pod level resource requirements later on in the proposal - I wanted to clarify that these additions are not part of this proposal (KEP-4112).

`UpdatePodSandboxResources` is not yet in the CRI API. KEP-1287 proposes to add that in Beta. So we'd want to sync with that

WDYT @SergeyKanzhelev ?

Reviewer 4: I mostly want to make sure we are not making changes that are not compatible with these two KEPs. So listing them as non-goals sounds like a bad idea. Maybe not a goal for alpha, but definitely a goal for beta.

Author: That's certainly what I want, too. To be in-sync between all the KEPs. I tried to state that this KEP (4112)
- is NOT proposing to add the new `UpdatePodSandboxResources` CRI rpc
- is NOT proposing to add pod-level resource requirements
- is proposing to align with those features when they land

The design details section contains details what changes (to align) would be made.

I now dropped these two non-goals as they cause more confusion than clarity. Maybe, instead, we should add in Goals to align with them?

For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The proposal only adds new informational data to the CRI API between kubelet
and the container runtime with no user-visible changes which mitigates possible
risks considerably.

Data duplication/inconsistency with native resources could be considered a risk
as those are passed down to CRI both as "raw" requests and limits and as
"translated" resource control parameters (like cpu shares oom scoring etc). But
this should be largely mitigated by code reviews and unit tests.

## Design Details

The proposal is that kubelet discloses full resources information from the
PodSpec to the container runtime. This is accomplished by extending the
ContainerConfig, UpdateContainerResourcesRequest and PodSandboxConfig messages
of the CRI API.

With this information, the runtime can for example do detailed resource
allocation so that CPU, memory and other resources for each container are

> optimally aligned.

Reviewer 4: how does it work with CPU manager? Is there any conflicts or any information we need to pass earlier than we do today w.r.t. decisions CPU manager made?

Author: CPU manager is not affected. It does its work before we pass the info down to the runtime. This particular sentence is referring to scenarios where cpu manager `none` policy is  be used in Kubernetes. Do you think that this should be mentioned in the proposal?

Reviewer 10: should be mentioned.. with (story 1/2) and without cpu manager (story 3)

Reviewer 4: +1 to mention. Any hints that kubelet has needs to be passed into the sandbox creation now?

Author: > +1 to mention.

I the following sentence in this paragraph:
*This applies to scenarios where the kubelet CPU manager is disabled (by using the `none` CPU manager policy).*

> Any hints that kubelet has needs to be passed into the sandbox creation now?

No. I don't think we want/need spill these details over. Also, the runtime (or NRI plugin) might have better understanding of the HW topology

The resource information is included in PodSandboxConfig so that the runtime
can see the full picture of Pod's resource usage at Pod creation time, for
example enabling more holistic resource allocation and thus better
interoperability between containers inside the Pod.

Also the CreateContainer request is extended to include the unmodified resource
requirements. This make it possible for the CRI runtime to detect any changes
in the pod resources that happen between the Pod creation and container

> creation in e.g.  scenarios where in-place pod updates are involved.

Reviewer 4: is it a possibility? Would there be a sandbox adjustment call in-between? Or it is not expected?

@tallclair are we allowing the container resource changes between the sandbox creation and conatiner creation? Maybe while init container is executing?

Author: TBH, I'm not entirely sure about all the dirty details here. But that exactly was the thinking: a loong-running init container, and pod gets updated before that is completed. And, because there are a lot of delicate details, this would also  make small adjustments/touch the container lifecycle handling in the future

Reviewer 10: and for ephemeral?

Author: Currently, ephemeral containers cannot have any resource requirements (in the Kubernetes API/PodSpec level). But your comment @mikebrow is good in that it might change in the future(?) Nothing in CRI or OCI prevents ephemeral containers having resources.

Reviewer 10: would have to check but I think the extra mounts may be different to include debug tools missing from a copied container in the pod..

Author: True, at least the mount for the logfile is probably different

Reviewer 10: nod.. so a certain exception for that container type.. also not clear we should explicitly fail if the mounts have changed which they might on a container restart due to modified volume drivers..?

Reviewer 10: detect sure.. what to do with that detection is probably a long running set of discussions and use case definitions. Stretch goals.

Author: No no, there are no changes wrt mounts (or devices) in CreateContainer request. Everything continues to work as it does now. Not related to this KEP, but with ephemeral containers there might scenarios where they cannot be supported, e.g. CoCo

Reviewer 4: ias @mikebrow said, if we have this information on sandbox creation and for some reason anything took a dependency on it, it will open the whole can of worms on how to handle all sorts of edge cases

> The UpdatePodSandboxResources CRI message is also updated when/if that is

Reviewer 4: updated in a sense that there will be an additional call in-between?

Author: No, the message will be updated. Re-phrased this paragraph now to:

```
[KEP-1287][kep-1287] Beta ([PR][kep-1287-beta-pr]) proposes to add new
UpdatePodSandboxResources rpc to the CRI API. If/when KEP-1287 is implemented
as proposed, the UpdatePodSandboxResources CRI message is updated to include
the resource information of all containers (aligning with
UpdateContainerResourcesRequest).
```

introduced by the [KEP-1287][kep-1287] Beta ([PR][kep-1287-beta-pr]).

> Information about the Pod-level resources are added when/if the Pod-level

Reviewer 4: @ndixita can you please confirm it is tracked in your KEP?

Author: Re-phrased this paragraph to

```
[KEP-2837][kep-2837] Alpha ([PR][kep-2837-alpha-pr]) proposes to add new        
Pod-level resource requirements field to the PodSpec. This information will be  
be added to the PodResourceConfig message, similar to the container resource    
information, if/when KEP-2837 is implemented as proposed.
```

The intention is to sync with the other KEPs

Reviewer 15: This is not tracked in Pod Level Resources KEP. While I am trying to understand this KEP, I have a question: Will the VM based runtimes benefit from knowing the overall requirements of all the containers in a pod and not requirements of individual containers? Again, this question is just for my understanding...

resources enhancement [KEP-2837][kep-2837] Alpha ([PR][kep-2837-alpha-pr]) is
implemented.

### CRI API

#### PodSandboxConfig

The PodSandboxConfig message (part of the RunPodSandbox request) will be
extended to contain information about resources of all its containers known at
the pod creation time. The container runtime may use this information to make
preparations for all upcoming containers of the pod. E.g. setup all needed
resources for a VM-based pod or prepare for optimal allocation of resources of
all the containers of the Pod. However, the container runtime may continue to
operate as they did (before this enhancement). That is, it can ignore
the resource information presented here and allocate resources for each
container separately at container creation time with the `CreateContainer`
request.

```diff

>  message PodSandboxConfig {

Reviewer 4: how bid this structure will be? What would be the max number of containers we can report in this structure? (what is the message size limit today?)

Author: By quick search the gRPC message size limit is 4MB. This is a lot more than the maximum size of a Pod object in Kubernetes. I believe we should not hit a limit in any practical scenario. WDYT?

Reviewer 4: 4Mb my be ok.

 
 ...
 
     // Optional configurations specific to Linux hosts.
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.

> +    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 10;

Reviewer 4: what runtime suppose to do when this does not match values provided in `resources` of `LinuxPodSandboxConfig`?

Author: There should be no overlapping information between these two structures. Thus a conflict should not be possible

Reviewer 4: I am not sure I understand. Maybe I am missing something here, but you should be able to calculate what is in `resources` based on pod spec. Is it correct? So some implementation may take dependency on specific way one is calculated. Thus the question, what if they will not be matching at some point. Also if they are inter-dependent, perhaps some of it may be deprecated?

Author: The runtime is not calculating resources of `LinuxPodSandboxConfig`. They are set by the kubelet

 }
 
+// PodResourceConfig contains information of all resources requirements of
+// the containers of a pod.
+message PodResourceConfig {
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 1;
+}
 
+// ContainerResourceConfig contains information of all resource requirements of
+// one container.
+message ContainerResourceConfig {
+    // Name of the container
+    string name= 1;
+
+    // Type of the container
+    ContainerType type= 2;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 3;
+
+    // Mounts for the container.
+    repeated Mount mounts = 4;
+
+    // Devices for the container.
+    repeated Device devices = 5;
+
+    // CDI devices for the container.
+    repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 6;
+}

+enum ContainerType {
+    INIT_CONTAINER    = 0;

> +    SIDECAR_CONTAINER = 1;

Reviewer 12: is this distinction one we want to make? does the kubelet make that distinction? cc @SergeyKanzhelev

Reviewer 4: it is a slippery slope to start introducing new types of containers. With the sidecar containers you need to know two things:

- that it is a sidecar
- position of a container in the list of init containers.

Position is very important as it defines how the total resources will be calculated.

Keeping structure as close to Pod Spec as possible would be helpful it we will introduce any other container types in future where ordering or any other attributes will also be important

Reviewer 4: /hold

to think if we can change the structure to make it closer to how pod spec look like

Reviewer 10: and thus that structure version number thing I was thinking we might need...

Reviewer 4: not necessarily to version it the same as pod. I think once we get to Pod v2, we may have a new CRI API as well

Author: The proposal had [separate lists for init container and containers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/b746f3720d52b072abfb401910558610a28a1018/keps/sig-node/4112-passdown-resources-to-cri/README.md#podsandboxconfig). Based on review feedback (e.g. https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4113#issuecomment-2045226579) it was changed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4113/commits/b3703c614a65a8e042d6d438af815807b15c4c0b to a single list, with a "container type" field.

The order IS important. Kubelet creates containers sequentially, The order of the single list is supposed to be that order (effectively `append(initContainers, containers)`)

Reviewer 4: Was the suggestion to mark init containers as sidecars? I am thinking - what if we will introduce a new property of a container that can be exhibited by a container of any type? Will it require us to introduce 6 more container types? Or we will just add a new field? If a new field - why not have a field "restartable" on init container in this implementation?

Author: The motivation for the proposed way is to keep it simple here, have the minimum to enable right-sizing of the Pod. Encode the expected lifecycle of each container in the Pod, enabling the calculation of "how many containers will/can be running at the same time".

FWIW, the only new type of container I came up with (but didn't include here) would be a "teardown container", running after all regular containers have finished.

Reviewer 12: from the perspective of right sizing, what's the difference between a sidecar and a regular container? seems to me we could define "INIT_CONTAINER" as containers that run before all of the other containers (restart Never) and then list sidecar as container? we may want slightly different terminology to not get confusing but that would decouple the kube scope creeep from the underlying runtimes that rely on knowing when a container is going to be running

Author: @haircommander I think you've got a point here. From the perspective of rightsizing sidecar and "regular" containers don't really differ. The ordering is what matters. 

@kad @zvonkok any thoughts?

Reviewer 6: theoretically, for us there is no difference is it sidecar or normal container. we just need way to differentiate if it is going to be "short lived" (init) or "long lived" ("normal"/"sidecar") container. On other hand, CRI API is Kubernetes-only API, thus having clean distinguishing between normal vs. "sidecar" might be still logical. I'd probably keep different constants to make sure in future we can add more container types if it will be introduced in k8s.

Reviewer 13: The most crucial factor would be the short-lived or long-lived aspect. We need to know which containers will be present throughout the Pod lifecycle, which is the VM lifecycle. The easy part is where the 
```
short-lived-resources << long-lived-resources
```
In this case we can size the PodVM according to the long-lived-resources and the short-lived would have enough resources to handle the workload. Now if 
```
short-lived-resources >> long-lived-resources
```
We would need to size the PodVM according to the short-lived and waste resources since the long-lived container does not require that much. This needs to be handled by the runtime and other policies.

Better resource utilization, means denser packing and more PodVMs per Node.

Author: I think the upside of only having two types 1) init/oneshot/shortlived and 2) regular/long-lived would be to hide assumptions/information about the kubernetes container lifecycle details as much as possible. Wavering a bit on this :man_shrugging:

> +    REGULAR_CONTAINER = 2;

Reviewer 12: IMO I'd just call this CONTAINER

Reviewer 10: Agree regular is extraneous/default.  Typing the container could prove useful. What happens when a container is not enumerated? I wonder if any container not defined at the time of running the pod be considered ephemeral?

Author: K, changed as suggested to plain `CONTAINER`

Author: > I wonder if any container not defined at the time of running the pod be considered ephemeral?

Yes, I think that's the case

 }
 
+// KubernetesResources contains the resource requests and limits as specified
+// in the Kubernetes core API ResourceRequirements.
+message KubernetesResources {
+    // Requests and limits from the Kubernetes container config.
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> requests = 1;
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> limits = 2;
+}
```

Note that mounts, devices, CDI devices are part of the ContainerConfig message
but are left out of the diff snippet above.

Including the KubernetesResources in the ContainerConfig message serves
multiple purposes:

1. Catch changes that happen between pod sandbox creation and container
   creation. For example, in-place pod updates might change the container
   before it was created.
2. Catch changes that happen over container restarts in in-place pod update
   scenarios
3. Consistency/completeness. Have enough information to make consistent action
   based only on information present in this rpc caal.

The resources (mounts, devices, CDI devices, Kubernetes resources) in the
CreateContainer request should be identical to what was (pre-)informed in the

> RunPodSandbox request. If they are different, the CRI runtime may fail the

Reviewer 4: how would we separate cases when VM was restarted and we don't really know what was originally passed to the sandbox creation any longer? I do not understand this consistency check argument

Author: Yes, this paragraph seems outdated, especially in the light of the in-place pod updates. The paragraph was added as a response to some review feedback (I just couldn't find that comment now)

How about re-phrasing it for example:

```
In some usage scenarios the container creation may fail if
the resources (mounts, devices, CDI devices, Kubernetes resources) in the       
CreateContainer request do not match what was (pre-)informed in the   
RunPodSandbox request. This may be the case e.g. in when 
changes are not allowed after a VM-based Pod has been created.
```

WDYT @SergeyKanzhelev ?

Reviewer 10: I believe he means the original pod metadata plus any pod updates must be applied to the pod before the container is created.

[PodSandboxConfig](#podsandboxconfig) message to contain information about
resources of all its containers. In UpdatePodSandboxResourcesRequest this will
reflect the updated resource requirements of the containers.

```diff
 message UpdatePodSandboxResourcesRequest {
     // ID of the PodSandbox to update.
     string pod_sandbox_id = 1;
 
     // Optional overhead represents the overheads associated with this sandbox
     LinuxContainerResources overhead = 2;
     // Optional resources represents the sum of container resources for this sandbox
     LinuxContainerResources resources = 3;
 
     // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary additional information for
     // sandbox resources updating. This can be used for specifying experimental
     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the sandbox.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.
+    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 5;
 }
```

The implementation will be synced with [KEP-1287][kep-1287].

### kubelet

Kubelet code is refactored/modified so that all container resources are known

> before sandbox creation. This mainly consists of preparing all mounts (of all

Reviewer 4: Is there a possibility that today some mounts can ONLY be created when container is being created (some thing that init container needs to initialize). Will this break this behavior?

Author: This was discussed/investigated in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4113#discussion_r1478654403

I think there should breakages because of this.

WDYT @SergeyKanzhelev ?

Reviewer 10: When appropriate image mounts included in the container config are added at create container time when we build the rootfs.. additionally oci level plugins, nri plugins, cdi, and cri proxy tools may add mounts. But these are not the "extra" mounts passed in from the host level CRI client (kubelet), additionally the OCI image volume mount is added by the container runtime during create container. In the OCI volume case this is why I'm asking for the oci volume image reference..

Author: The `Mount` structure is exactly the same (with the same information) that what will be passed as part of the CreateContainerRequest/ContainerConfig message

Reviewer 10: that works..

Reviewer 4: it actually goes back to this comment: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4113#discussion_r1468237753

Would it be expected that runtimes will need to mount everything at pod sandbox creation time now? Or the behavior is not defined? Will we require that the old way (without passing all this extra context in sandbox creation) should continue working?

Author: The runtimes do not need to change the way they operate. They don't need to mount everything at sandbox creation.

All of the data is something that the runtime CAN use if it needs it. E.g. [this paragraph](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/ea204299c71c4571ff0f38fa51e589e9104ccb16/keps/sig-node/4112-passdown-resources-to-cri/README.md#:~:text=The%20container%20runtime%20may,with%20the%20CreateContainer%20request.) of the proposal tries to state that. Maybe we need to state that more clearly in more places(?) And certainly comments in the cri proto file.

Reviewer 4: The CAN part worries me. If something CAN be used the only assumption we can make is that it IS BEING USED. This is why maybe we should have two modes of operations

Reviewer 6: @SergeyKanzhelev as it was mentioned above, this information is really needed in some scenarios, and OCI runtimes that are dependent on that information will be using it, to fix current problem. Other runtimes that don't have problems now are expected to ignore it.

"translated" resource control parameters (like cpu shares oom scoring etc). But
this should be largely mitigated by code reviews and unit tests.

## Design Details

The proposal is that kubelet discloses full resources information from the
PodSpec to the container runtime. This is accomplished by extending the
ContainerConfig, UpdateContainerResourcesRequest and PodSandboxConfig messages
of the CRI API.

However, the proposal does not suggest any changes to the division of
responsibilities between the kubelet and the runtime or in the pod and
container lifecycle management. The additional information can be thought seen
as a "forward lookup" of things that are going to happen in the future.
Information that can be used in scenarios that depend on it.

With the extended PodSandboxConfig, the runtime can see the full picture of
Pod's resource usage at Pod creation time, for example enabling more holistic
resource allocation and thus better interoperability between containers inside
the Pod. The runtime may use the information to make preparations for all
upcoming containers of the pod. E.g.  setup all needed resources for a VM-based

> pod or prepare for optimal allocation of resources of all the containers of the

Reviewer 11: Can we provide more details around this aspect? It isn't clear to me from reading the KEP how the values will be used for _optimal allocation_. Maybe an example would help shed some light?

+}
 
+// ContainerResourceConfig contains information of all resource requirements of
+// one container.
+message ContainerResourceConfig {
+    // Name of the container
+    string name= 1;
+
+    // Type of the container
+    ContainerType type= 2;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 3;
+
+    // Mounts for the container.
+    repeated Mount mounts = 4;
+
+    // Devices for the container.
+    repeated Device devices = 5;
+
+    // CDI devices for the container.
+    repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 6;
+}

+enum ContainerType {
+    INIT_CONTAINER    = 0;
+    SIDECAR_CONTAINER = 1;
+    CONTAINER = 2;
+}
```

The Pod-level resources enhancement [KEP-2837][kep-2837]
([alpha PR][kep-2837-alpha-pr]) proposes to add new Pod-level resource
requirements fields to the PodSpec. This information will be be added to the
PodResourceConfig message, similar to the container resource information.

```diff
 message PodResourceConfig {
     repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 1;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the pod-level resource requirements.
+    KubernetesResources kubernetes_resources = 2;
 }
```

> The implementation if adding the KubernetesResources field to the

Reviewer 15: of adding?

Author: Fixed

ContainerConfig, UpdateContainerResourcesRequest and PodSandboxConfig messages
of the CRI API.

With this information, the runtime can for example do detailed resource
allocation so that CPU, memory and other resources for each container are
optimally aligned.

The resource information is included in PodSandboxConfig so that the runtime
can see the full picture of Pod's resource usage at Pod creation time, for
example enabling more holistic resource allocation and thus better
interoperability between containers inside the Pod.

### CRI API

#### ContainerConfig

The ContainerConfig message (used in CreateContainer request) is extended to
contain unmodified resource requests from the PodSpec.

```diff
+import "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/resource/generated.proto";

 message ContainerConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
 
     // CDI devices for the container.
     repeated CDIDevice CDI_devices = 17;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig container_resources = 18;
 }
 
+message ContainerResourceConfig {
+    // Name of the container

> +    string name= 1;

Reviewer 12: why do we need the name, it's already part of ContainerConfig

Reviewer 12: ah because it's duplicated for the pod request too. could you add a note there about that

Author: Added a note to this field (`name`)

```
Note: name is redundant for container-specific requests (UpdateContainerResourcesRequest)
but needed for pod-specific requests (PodSandboxConfig).
```

@haircommander is this ok?

Reviewer 12: that works thanks!

+    // Requests and limits hold corresponding container resources data.
+    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> requests = 2;

> +    map<string, k8s.io.apimachinery.pkg.api.resource.Quantity> limits = 3;

Reviewer 12: should the keys here be a special type instead of unstructured?

Author: I don't think it's possible to have smth like `type ResourceName string` in protobuf. Please correct me if I'm wrong

Author: ping @haircommander, are you satisfied with the reply (close as resolved)?

     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the container.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    ContainerResourceConfig container_resources = 5;
 }
```

#### PodSandboxConfig

The PodSandboxConfig message (part of the RunPodSandbox request) will be
extended to contain information about resources of all its containers known at
the pod creation time. The container resources here are non-binding and only
informational, e.g. for the runtime to prepare for optimal allocation of
resources of all the containers of the Pod.

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Optional configurations specific to Linux hosts.
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.
+    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 10;
 }
 
+message PodResourceConfig {
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig init_containers = 1;
+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 2;
+}
```

### kubelet

> Kubelet will be be extended to pass down the unmodified resource requests and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubelet will be extended to pass down the unmodified resource requests and
```

Author: Thx, fixed in the latest update

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

The kubelet does not provide complete information about the container
resources specification (requests and limits) to CRI. However, various use
cases have been identified where detailed knowledge of all the resources can be
utilized in container runtimes for more optimal resource allocation to improve
application performance and reduce cross-application interference.

This KEP proposes a CRI API extension for disclosing container resource
requests and limits to container runtimes.

## Motivation

Kubelet manages the native resources (CPU and memory) and communicates
resource parameters over the CRI API to the runtime. However, the original
details of the resource spec are lost as they get translated (within kubelet)
to platform-specific (i.e. Linux or Windows) resource controller parameters

> like cpu shares, memory limits etc. Non-native resources such as extended

Reviewer: How does this proposal interact with mechanisms such as the existing device plugin API, CDI devices, or DRA in terms of providing access to non-native resources? In which cases is the number of plugin devices requested useful to a CRI runtime?

Maybe my question is, should this proposal be limited to only CPU and Memory, or extended to better capture the acctual resources allocated to all containers? The latter would then include CDI devices from DRA or device plugins, for example.

Reviewer 13: @elezar CPU and Memory is already handled via https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/104886 we need the additional information for non "trivial" devices, like you all already mentioned.

Reviewer 13: In the case of Kata, we need to create the correct PCIe topology during sandbox creation time. We need to know how many PCIe root-ports or PCIe switch-ports to create before the device is hot-plugged in the create container phase. 
In the case of cold-plugging the PCIe topology and direct attach of the devices needs to happen at sandbox creation time not container.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification. I suppose my question is whether just listing the devices as requested is sufficient to extract the information that you need. For example, for a node with multiple devices I don't see how the the count for `vendor.com/xpu` in the request maps to PCI topology -- unless the Container Runtime is also aware of device specifics.

Note, I'm not opposed to passing down the information as requested if this really is useful, I would just like the proposal extended to properly capture the resource request details -- ideally reusing the existing structures to ensure these remain consistent.

Reviewer 13: Ideally, each extended resource allocation or resource claim is a CDI device, and the name of the allocated resource is a fully qualified CDI name rather than some "logical" name like `vendor.com/xpu: 1`. 
With this information, a runtime like Kata can get the correct information from the CDI registry since the primary key is the FQN. 
If the allocated resource is "just"  a logical name, we need to provide additional information because we cannot deduce the correct information from an extended resource name, and we do not know anything about the DevicePlugin business logic.

Reviewer 13: There is also another complication which depends on how we're presenting the device into a VM. (1) The VFIO device is handled by the native driver or (2) the VFIO device is handled by the `vfio-pci` driver in the VM itself. 
For the second case, we're just passing-through the VFIO IOMMU group and a new one is created in the VM.
For the first case when a native driver handles the HW, how do we know which instance was meant to be allocated by the container if multiple devices are allocated?

Author: @elezar do you think this has been addressed (and marked as resolved?). To recap, the KEP now contains all mounts, devices and CDI devices.

Reviewer: Yes, I think the new itteration looks better in this regard. The key being that the resources listed includes those under the control of the various device plugins for extended resources.

Author: Resolved?

e.g. for reserving all required resources at pod sandbox creation (as it might
be hard to impossible after that) or doing customized resource optimization.
Extending the CRI API in to include the resource information would provide a
comprehensive view of all resource usage of containers, allowing improved
resource allocation without breaking any existing use cases.

### Goals

- make container resource spec transparently visible to CRI (the container
  runtime)

### Non-Goals

- change kubelet resource management
- change existing behavior of CRI

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a VM-based container runtime developer, I want to allocate/expose enough
RAM, hugepages, GPU memory, protected memory sections and other resources for
the VM to ensure that all containers in the pod are guaranteed to get the
resources they require.

#### Story 2

As a platform-optimized CRI runtime developer, I want to know detailed
container resource requests to be able to make optimal, platform specific,
resource allocations. Some of the resources may be handled outside cgroups and
be container runtime specific details.

#### Story 3

> As a cluster administrator, I want to install an OCI hook/runc wrapper/NRI

Reviewer: Could you expand on this use case? How does extending the CRI translate to modifications in the OCI runtime specification which is interpreted by runc (or wrappers)?

Author: The CRI changes (in this KEP) would not directly translate to anything in the OCI config. It's just "informational" that a possible hook/wrapper/plugin can then use to tweak the OCI config. Say you want to do customized cpu pinning in your plugin. I'll come up with some more flesh on this section...

Reviewer: Thanks.

Author: Resolved?

Author: ping @elezar may I close this as resolved?

     // Resource configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerResources windows = 3;
     // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary additional information for
     // container resources updating. This can be used for specifying experimental
     // resources to update or other options to use when updating the container.
     map<string, string> annotations = 4;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the container
+    ContainerResourceConfig container_resources = 5;
 }
```

#### PodSandboxConfig

The PodSandboxConfig message (part of the RunPodSandbox request) will be
extended to contain information about resources of all its containers known at
the pod creation time. The container resources here are non-binding and only
informational, e.g. for the runtime to prepare for optimal allocation of
resources of all the containers of the Pod.

```diff
 message PodSandboxConfig {
 
 ...
 
     // Optional configurations specific to Linux hosts.
     LinuxPodSandboxConfig linux = 8;
     // Optional configurations specific to Windows hosts.
     WindowsPodSandboxConfig windows = 9;
+
+    // Kubernetes resource spec of the containers in the pod.

> +    PodResourceConfig pod_resources = 10;

Reviewer 5: @MikeZappa87 since you shared recently something along these lines for the networking capabilities, this KEP also means to interface with NRI

+    repeated ContainerResourceConfig containers = 2;
+}
```

### kubelet

Kubelet will be be extended to pass down the unmodified resource requests and
limits to the container runtime in all related CRI requests, i.e.
RunPodSandbox, CreateContainer and UpdateContainerResources.

For example, take a PodSpec:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
...
spec:
  containers:
    - name: cnt-1
      ...
      resources:
        requests:
          cpu: 1
          memory: 1G
        limits:
          cpu: 2
          memory: 2G
    - name: cnt-2
      ...
      resources:
        requests:
          cpu: 100m
          memory: 100M
          vendor.com/xpu: 1
        limits:
          cpu: 200m
          memory: 200M
          vendor.com/xpu: 1
```

Then kubelet will send the following RunPodSandboxRequest when creating the Pod
(represented here in yaml format):

```yaml
RunPodSandboxRequest:
  config:
  ...
    podResources:
      containers:
        - name: cnt-1
          requests:
            cpu: 1
            memory: 1G
          limits:
           cpu: 2
           memory: 2G
        - name: cnt-2
          requests:
            cpu: 100m
            memory: 100M

>             vendor.com/xpu: 1

Reviewer: For clarification: This does not indicate the properties of the resource that was actually allocated for a container requesting one of these devices?

Author: That's very much true. I think I'll add a note about this in the KEP somewhere

Author: ping @elezar may I close this as resolved?
